Good afternoon and welcome to the inaugural procedure.
December 1st, 2025, 4:00 PM They always give me a script.
It's like they think I'm gonna say something I shouldn't.
I don't know why they always give me a script,
but anyway, uh, I'd like to, uh, call the meeting to order.
Could I have a, uh, oh,
we're not gonna do the roll call for us.
We're going to introduce, uh, Jules Vazquez.
It's an honor to introduce you today.
Uh, Jules, a remarkable young leader from our own South
Portland community, a proud Tino descendant dancer
and dedicated community advocate.
Mayor elect, uh, Tipton has chosen Jules
to join us this evening to give the invocation as a voice
of the youth of our South Portland community.
Beyond her academic pursuits.
Jules performs with the main state Ballet, a student at USM,
the South Portland Human Rights Commission, driven
by a passion for storytelling, science, and social justice.
We welcome Jules Vasque to deliver this year's invocation.
And welcome. I'm glad you found time for us.
Uh, hello. Is this, is this good? Okay.
Um, today I'm gonna read a poem that I wrote.
Um, it's called 14 square Miles of Tomorrow.
I wrote it about our little town of South Portland, um,
about maybe three
or four months ago, 14 square miles of tomorrow.
The air hums electric on summer nights.
Streets stitched with bike le le lanes and wild flowers.
Casco Bay sparkling, like a kept promise beyond the pines.
We walk barefoot through damp park grass,
where car concrete once ruled,
laughing under street lights fueled
by the sun breathing deep.
No smog. No smog, no sorrow.
The lighthouses still stand older than memory.
They're beams sweeping across the city
that finally listens to the tides.
Fairy horns echo across murals and open air markets.
Kids dart between food trucks
and music rising from the docks, while surfers
and old sailors swap stories by the fire neighbors.
Trade seedlings and second chances.
Front porches flicker with guitars and open doors.
Housing isn't a prize, it's a promise.
The ocean, once bruised by our forgetting, shimmers clean
whales, carrying silver arcs through the open blue,
and the tides carry only hope to the shore.
Here. We don't build walls, we build tables longer
and longer until no one stands alone.
South Portland, a city stitched together by hands, hearts,
and the stubborn belief
that tomorrow deserves our best today,
Would you all rise for the, uh, pledge of Allegiance
as you're able, I pledge
allegiance to the flag of the United States of America
and to the republic for which it stands,
one nation under God, individual with liberty
and justice for all.
Madam Clerk, may I have a roll call, please?
Counselor Cohen. Here. Counselor Coleman. Here.
Counselor Pride. Here. Counselor Tipton. Here.
Councilor Walker Here.
Councilor West here. And Mayor Matthews.
Yes, ma'am. There is a quorum.
Uh, this is time for me to say a few words,
and I'm gonna say very few because tonight is more about,
uh, mayor Elect, uh, Tipton and, uh, councilor Cohen.
Uh, I just wanna say thank you to all the city councilors
for, uh, being with me over the last year.
Uh, more importantly, I wanna thank the community.
Uh, we had a huge, uh,
commitment from the community this year on many groups, uh,
being at the city council meetings for, uh, Mahoney forums
and our Mahoney tours.
And, uh, I just wanna thank you all
for, uh, being part of that.
But the people I really want to thank are the staff
of the city, of South Portland.
Our employees are simply the best,
and I wouldn't wanna be anyplace else.
Uh, we have a great fire department, police department,
parks and rec, waterfront, uh, public works,
finance, payroll.
Help me with all of them. So everybody.
So I don't miss anybody. Everybody. Okay.
Jewels, sustainability. Thank you.
So what, I wanna thank you all
because seriously, without you, uh,
we wouldn't be the city that we are.
So thank you very much.
At this time, I'd like to present Counselor Cohen
a plaque, and this says,
A member city council presented Linda Cohen, appreciation
for your exceptional leadership
and devoted service to the city of South Poland,
2021 to 2025.
But we really know it's from 1,905 to,
so thank
Councilor Cohen.
I invite you to say a few words.
Thank you. I'll keep it brief.
I just wanna say what an absolute honor it has been
to serve the citizens of South Portland,
and thank you for that opportunity.
Um, just to follow up a little bit on
what the mayor just said, um, counselors, please be good
to the employees of this city.
They are some of the best.
Uh, they are the professionals in the room.
They really do know what they're doing, so please listen
to them and please be good to the businesses
of this community because they're without them.
Uh, the real estate property tax
for the average homeowner would be going
through the roof even more than it already is.
So, um, those are my two requests of the council
as I leave. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Council Cohen,
I'm gonna take the opportunity to allow any other counselors
to, uh, bid farewell to, uh, councilor Cohen.
Uh, go ahead, councilor Pride.
Councilor Cohen, I, I can't say enough
how much I think you've had
a strongly positive impact on this community,
on the city and on the council.
Um, I think that, uh, we are going
to very much miss your institutional memory.
Um, and I think that you have always acted
with integrity in everything we've done as a council.
Um, and so I really appreciate that
and you will be very much missed.
Thank you. Anybody else? Councilor Tipton.
I wanna underline what Councilor Pride just said
and also say that in addition to being, um, kind
of a historian in some ways for our council,
Linda is someone who has modeled a real ability to listen
and to weigh what people are telling her
and to ask very insightful questions.
And you can see those little, those old wheels turning
as she comes to a decision.
And I have appreciated being able to see that process
because it is an example to follow.
Thank you. Thank you.
Anybody else? Council West.
Just from, as a citizen,
I remember sitting when Councilor Cohen ran
for council the first time
and just, uh, really being admiring her when she said
that she wanted to give back to the community
that she had served as a, as a, an employee for so long.
And I, and that was quite a long time ago, wasn't it?
Counselor Cohen. So all of these years she certainly has
and I appreciate it very much.
Any other con? Yes. Council Walker,
I just wanna thank you for your
leadership and your guidance.
I really feel very privileged
that I had a chance to serve with you.
And thank you for all of your service
to South Portland over the years you'll be greatly missed.
Thank you.
And I'm just going to say you're gonna be greatly missed.
Uh, your knowledge of process is just amazing in recall.
You really are a precious resource.
We're gonna miss you And thank you.
Thank you counselors. Clerk.
At this time will councilor elect Carter Scott,
councilor elect Natalie West
and counselor elect Richard Matthews.
Join me in front of Theas for their sworn aneth lectern.
Okay. If I can all have you raise your
hand, repeat after me.
I solemnly swear. I
Solemnly Swear that I'll support the Constitution. I
Support the Constitution
and will obey the laws of the United States and will obey
The laws of the United States
And of the state of Maine, and
Of the state of Maine.
That I will in all respects, that
I will in all Respects,
observe the provisions of the charter,
Observe, observe provisions of the charter
And ordinances of the city of South Portland,
And ordinance of the city of South
Portland, and will faithfully discharge my duties and will
Faithfully discharge my duties
In the Office of City Council. In
The office of City Council,
I now duly declare Counselor Scott and Counselor West,
and Counselor Matthews as city councilors
for the city of South Portland.
At this time, I would like to ask for nominations for mayor
for the 25 26.
Yes. Councilor Walker. I
Nominate Councilor Elise Tipton.
Do we have a second? I second the
Nomination. Thank you. Councilor
West.
Any other nominations at this time?
I move that nominations cease.
Thank you. Councilor Pride. Do I have a second?
I second the nomination or
Motion. Thank you. Councilor Scott.
Nominations at this time have
ceased and I will take a roll call.
Vote for mayor of the 25 26 year
Counselor Coleman.
Yes. Counselor Pride.
Yes. Counselor Matthews?
Yes ma'am. Counselor Walker? Yes. Counselor West. Yes.
And Counselor Scott? Yes. That is unanimous.
Are we doing this
to change out your name?
Oh, yes.
As my official first duty,
I get a very great privilege
and that is to present to, I guess, former
mayor Richard T. Matthews of the city of South Portland,
this plaque and this gavel, which I hope you'll use wisely.
And then also I think we should show everyone the picture
of Mayor Matthews that will hang.
Well, definitely 20 pounds light up.
You know, the only thing I've ever seen Mayor Matthews do
wrong when he's, um,
chairing the meetings is not allow us enough time
to say thank you as counselors today.
So before I say anything else, I just want to say personally
that I am very grateful to Dick Matthews.
He was the school board chair
who welcomed me onto the school board.
I learned a lot from watching him.
I learned more from watching him as our mayor.
And the thing that I think I admire the most is
that he has always treated everyone, even people
who might be a little cantankerous, um, fairly
and respectfully.
And it's a real example to follow.
Thank you.
I am honored by the vote of my fellow counselors.
I thank you for it.
I'm grateful for your trust,
and I want to remind everyone that we are a team
and we're a good one.
And I wanted to thank Jules.
She and her dad had to leave to go
and watch her brother play in a basketball game.
But, um, I wanted to thank her very much
for giving us our invocation
and for writing that beautiful poem.
And I also wanted to thank my family
and my friends for their support.
In the year ahead,
our city counselors will continue engaging in thoughtful,
dedicated decision making to serve our fellow residents
and support the work of more than 600 full-time, part-time
and seasonal city employees
who keep our city running every day
and do it with professionalism and pride.
And I just think we need to have a round of applause
for our city staff.
Our South Portland city of nearly 27,000 residents
and more than 1200 businesses is my home.
And I am inspired to serve here at the local level
of government, especially right now in this country.
The local level is
where our voices can most clearly be heard.
Ours is a local community willing to step up, adapt,
and come together even in the most challenging times.
And that's clear from South Portland's history.
Here's a powerful story that historian Seth Goldstein shared
with me recently at the South Portland Historical
Society Museum.
In April of 1942, the residents
of the Cushing's Point neighborhood, the area we now know
as our beloved bug light park,
received letters from the federal government
with limited advance warning.
Those letters gave them just nine days to leave their homes
so the shipyard could expand to support the war effort.
Can you imagine being given just nine days for that?
Those families had lived there for generations.
Their lives and memories were rooted in that neighborhood
and it was unfair.
And yet it came at a time when people across the country
were making sacrifices, planting victory gardens,
rationing gasoline, salvaging metal,
and believing deeply in a shared purpose.
At a time of instability
and understandable fear, the families
of Cushing's Point gathered their strength,
accepted compensation that could never replace what was lost
and made their sacrifice with courage.
Those ordinary South Portlanders mobilized to help the world
confront a grave threat.
That story tells us something. South Portlanders show up.
We innovate, we help our neighbors, we work together.
And I have seen that firsthand serving on our school board.
I watched residents from every part of the city work
through tough discussions
to support building a beautiful new middle school
and incredible investment in our children and our future.
Just this year came another generational investment.
When two volunteer led committees,
our conservation committee
and our open space committee, helped our city purchase
and begin to preserve nearly 40 acres
of land near Hinkley Park for public trails
and wildlife conservation and education.
South Portland today is also the kind of city
that helped open the new Preble Street Food Security hub on
our city's west side in its kitchens on Darling Avenue,
I was amazed to learn that staff
and volunteers can prepare up to 10,000 meals a day
and store 50,000 meals to respond to hunger
and emergencies anywhere in Maine.
We're a community where every winter a group of adults
and teenagers makes sure older residents have buckets
of sand delivered to their doorsteps
to help prevent falls on ice and snow.
That is not a federal program and it doesn't make headlines,
but it's neighbors seeing a need and filling it.
And South Portland is a city that welcomes immigrants
who have come here to raise families, educate children,
open businesses, and build prosperous lives
and communities just as immigrants
to America have done for generations.
Now, looking ahead, I believe South Portland's generous,
brave, and bold history can guide us today's challenges,
climate resilience, housing land use the health of our air
and water, and more require knowledge
and courage, creativity and collaboration.
We are in a moment
where South Portland neighbors can help shape South Portland
decisions that will have long lasting impact.
And we've got many ways for you to do that.
As we near completion of the city's new comprehensive plan
for land use and growth, our council wants to ensure
and main law requires
that it reflects community guidance while a dedicated
comprehensive planning committee has shaped the draft plan.
The final phase calls for more public input.
So through January, please visit
so po 20 forty.com where you'll be able
to make comments directly in the draft plan.
We also will continue
to have meaningful public engagement opportunities
around a potential Mahoney city center that would
transform the historic school building
and the surrounding land
that has served South Portlanders since 1924.
There's tremendous interest in this project
and it could be a game changer for South Portland's future.
This is an exceptional opportunity
to create a welcoming downtown hub with gathering spaces,
arts and recreational resources,
and a modern public library that meets real community needs
for learning and diverse programming.
The city center also could create a cost saving
long lasting way to provide city services
and modernize our public safety facilities,
while also opening redevelopment opportunities potentially
for housing on sites such
as the current city hall home across our city.
There's overwhelming agreement
that South Portland needs more housing.
It is the foundation of stability and health.
This year, the South Portland Housing Authority completed
Betsy Ross Crossing,
bringing 52 new affordable homes for seniors.
And with state funding now committed at least 38 more
affordable apartment homes will follow Within the next two
years, we have opportunities ahead
to create housing that's climate resilient, that aligns
with new state housing policies
and that supports walkable bikeable neighborhoods.
We can't expect our young people
and other workers to provide services in South Portland
and help keep our local businesses vibrant
if they can't find a place to live.
And it's essential to support
and expand our creative local businesses.
They strengthen our tax base
and give generously to our community.
In fact, we're going to celebrate them at our annual
business Recogni Recognition Awards
that will be here at the high school on
Wednesday, February 25.
And everyone is welcome to attend.
A strong future for South Portland doesn't come
from standing still.
It comes from growing in the right places in the right ways,
so that access to our assets
and resources as well as the cost
of running this city is shared more fairly
and sustainably across our community.
As past generations
of South Portlanders adapted their shoreline
to meet the needs of their time,
our residents today are suggesting new approaches.
One example is the potential redevelopment of acres of land
that hosts aging oil storage tanks, many
of which stand empty.
South Portland residents also want solutions
to unhealthy air emissions
that the state's environmental monitoring has documented
Near tanks that still are in use
and South Portlanders are working on other ideas too.
We may see a dog park for our city.
We may see a locally produced music festival at Bug Light.
We may see food trucks
and other mobile businesses serving our community.
The lesson from South Portland's history is
that we can adapt and move forward boldly.
So let's demonstrate our pride in that kind of main moxie
by creating what we need next in our shared home.
Let's use the privilege
and the power of our local democracy to connect with
and listen to one another.
Let's ask and answer hard questions honestly.
And when we challenge one another's opinions, let's do that
with civility and compassion.
And let's show up for real, not just online.
In social media, we can do hard things
and we can have nice things.
We can grow and change in ways that are smart, responsible,
and potentially save us from bigger costs down the road.
And maybe just maybe
South Portland can help remind the country
where we know people are struggling of
what is possible when neighbors work together with kindness,
commitment, and respect.
I am honored and a bit nervous to serve as your mayor
for the coming year, fellow counselors and residents
and city staff, business owners and community leaders
and volunteers.
I look forward to this work with all of you, thankfully.
Unlike those families who bravely sacrificed
by leaving Cushing's point, we've got more than nine days.
Thank you.
I move that the inaugural address
be spread across the records.
And I second the motion. We have a motion.
All those in favor? Aye.
Aye. We have a majority
and now we can order
that the inaugural address shall be spread on the records.
Um, we are about to come to the close
and we will move for adjournment in a moment.
But before we do, I want to remind you
that our very important
school board inauguration is immediately following
this inauguration.
So please stay. That will be worth your while.
And it shows the respect
that those school board members deserve.
Um, I also wanted to quickly remind folks that, um,
there's going to be a tree lighting ceremony
at Mill Creek on Friday.
So dress warmly and please come for that.
It's always very beautiful and a fun time.
And, um, I think that's pretty much all I have
to do here today except smile at all of you
and really be grateful for your being here.
Can we have a motion to adjourn? Motion to adjourn.
Nicely done. Do we have a second? Second. Is that unanimous?
Yes. Yes.
I guess we were supposed to do this
speech.
Well, we each have one. You can I think.
Oh, I guess we get to bang when we adjourn. Oh, we
Get to bang this. Will we adjourn?
Yeah.
Don't forget your clap.
Were you timing it?
No, thank you sir.
If is gonna call the meeting,
call as vice, we're gonna call the meeting.
Okay. Just opening a
That's
read the opening statement.
I, I, I mean, I don't,
I said I would just say we would normally have our opening
but we're not gonna need And then you would turn it,
just turn to me and I would welcome them.
Okay. And then well,
and then, um,
after the, then you'll call them to the podium to this.
And after this we'll go down
and they'll, okay, so call the order
and take, we'll call here then
something about, well actually yeah,
do not need to, it is, how are you
gonna say something about,
I dunno, anything I, the blind eye.
I have to,
yeah,
I I don't know where mine is.
Actually we have to leave around five o'clock. Okay.
Alright. Hi. Hi. Hi. Hi.
They don't come up quite yet. They don't come up quite yet.
Okay. Yeah. So you're here.
I had so much other stuff scheduled.
We're gonna be in our old seats.
First tests.
I was gonna, I'll have to wait. You're not allowed yet.
We're gonna call the meeting to order. So you need that.
I don't think you sit here anymore. Well, I was told
to sit here momentarily.
Are you guys seniors? So how's,
how's, what's happening here?
Okay. Do you have a name tag?
No, I just don't exist anymore, I guess.
Well, not I take up too much space to not exist.
You absolutely exist.
Name tag That.
There we go. It should have been over there,
but just not there for some reason.
Where, what Adrian? I know
They get collected with the others by accident.
Only 30,000.
Adrian,
Do a roll call of these people. Then
You said welcome everyone to the inauguration.
It and then if you don't pay,
if you don't whatever.
No, Jessica. Sorry. Okay. Alright. Okay.
She had include one 12 extra that goes to the principal.
So, so a loan company. Here's the thing.
This is, this is the loans 1 0 1.
So Scott, is Jessica still here?
They're always gonna, they're
always gonna pay themselves first.
He, he might have grabbed, they take their interest
and then the rest, the actual city clerk.
Actual debt. So there's two things.
You pay you them the interest,
but the privilege that the interest
and then you paying the actual debt. Pay one 12
Doesn't have Specify this to the principal owner
Or should I just go?
Can cut like a, okay. Alright.
Calling uh, the school board meeting in
or uh, call order.
I'm gonna, uh, roll call. Um, DeAngelos. Here.
Dowling. Here. Holman Here. Ratliff Here.
Rocher Richardson. Here. Kabisa Here.
Davidson Here. I just want to, uh, welcome everyone
to the inauguration of, uh, the school board.
Uh, Rosemary, I believe that you have a,
I'm gonna begin by inviting my friends
to come up for their opening.
Good evening and welcome.
We are honored to be here today.
We represent your community, all of it.
And we value the opportunity to stand here
and speak with you.
Please listen to what we have to say.
Try to adjust your ears to many different sounds,
which is what we do every day, all day.
Our hope is to become a part of your city
and a part of your life.
Thank you.
Today, our
Important
Friends, thank you for listening to us.
The messages from each speaker was the same.
And it was this, we are your neighbors,
we are your community members,
your coworkers, and your students.
We want to be your friends.
And we ask you please to remember our faces, our voices,
and listen to our words.
They matter. We matter.
Ash,
And this is what we said.
Please, please.
I want to tell you a little bit about this amazing,
incredible group of friends.
Parisa Moti from Iran spoke to you in Farsi.
She is an early childhood educator
with a bachelor's degree from USM
and also handles the financials
for her husband's plumbing business.
Ramson and SVA from Uganda with Heritage from Rwanda,
spoke to you in Kinyarwanda.
He works two full-time jobs as a direct support professional
and attends SMCC studying cybersecurity.
Mohammed Bahir,
although he would give you his newer name of Mo Isa
is from Iraq and he spoke to you in Arabic.
He studied finance in Baghdad
and he is now a senior accountant
with People's Choice Credit Union.
Jean Tam from Cambodia spoke to you in Kamai.
She is the department head managing all dental assistance at
the UNE Oral Health Center.
And her daughter, who's here as well, attends Kaler School.
Pedro Uba from Angola spoke to you in Portuguese.
He worked for Chevron in Angola,
has completed the automotive program at SMCC
and works as a lead foreman,
machinist at Abbott Industries.
Abdi, no iFan from Somalia. Spoke in Somali.
He's a journalist and an author having written the book.
Call Me American.
If you haven't read it, you should I tell you this
because I want you to know they are a mere sampling
of our community and they contribute to our city,
our state, and our country.
And I'm honored to call them my friends.
Let's give them recognition.
Say thank you and welcome them to this space.
You Wanna welcome the new members
To come up because they're gonna be sworn in.
So, um, I invite the new members up, uh,
to be sworn in.
Daniel Feller Elany Richardson, George Reish
and Tyler Smith.
Please come up. So, uh, the city clerk can swear you in.
I will ask each of you to raise your right hand
and repeat after me. I solemnly swear
Imn Solemnly swear
that I will support the constitution. That I will
Support the constitution
And obey the laws of the United States
And of the state of Maine, and of the
State of Maine. That
I will in all respects,
Everyone in all respects, Observe the provisions
of the charter, observe
The provisions of the Charter
And the ordinances of South Portland and
The ordinances of South Portland.
And will faithfully Discharge my duties,
will faithfully discharge my duties as a member
of the school board, as a member of our school board.
Congratulations.
Now they're gonna come. Okay.
Did you end up with Adrian? Yes. You were looking for that.
Sorry. Where did you find it? Yes.
Okay. We, uh, as vice chair, I am taking over the meeting
and we are now, uh, accepting nominations
for the chair of the school board.
I moved to nominate Rose Marie DeAngelos to be chair
of the South Port Portland School Board.
I second Are there any other nominations?
Seeing none, I lost the agenda. If I can have that.
Uh, seeing none will take a roll call.
Vote for the chair, uh,
by Rosemary Angelis for the coming year.
Uh, Adrian Dowling. Yes.
Sorry, I need to take these off. Daniel Feller. Yes.
Uh, Claire Holman. Yes. Uh, Eleni Richardson. Yes.
Uh, George Rich. Yes. Tyler Smith? Yes.
And, uh, Angela Kabisa. Yes. And Alex Davison? Yes.
And Rosemary DeAngelos? Yes. So that is unanimous.
Thank you. Um,
and we are also now accepting nominations for Vice chair
and I will make the nomination of Adrian Owling.
Seconded. And that's seconded.
Are there any other nominations? Seeing none.
Uh, we'll take a roll call, vote again.
Uh, for Vice Chair DeAngelos? Yes.
Uh, board member Feller? Yes. Member Holman.
Yes. Member Richardson. Yes. Member Rich. Yes.
Member Smith? Yes. Member Kabisa. Yes. And Member Davidson?
Yes. And Member Dowling? Yes.
And, uh, that is also unanimous.
So we have elected a chair and a vice chair. Thank you.
So first I want to thank former, uh, chair Tandy Ratliff
for her leadership during a challenging transition.
Tandy, you have a remarkable ability to balance needs, wants
and kindness all rolled into one.
And I'm grateful to have served as your vice chair.
I thank you. Also, Susan Rauscher,
who I don't think is here,
but I wanna thank her for her dedication during her term.
And Susan, I would say to you, your thoughtful comments
and questions offered insight
and perspective that I had not considered.
And your role affected my willingness
to look at all the possibilities.
I will miss you both, but I'm happy
that you'll continue as my friend.
I'd also like to welcome the newly elected members,
feller Smith Richardson.
And Rich. Your willingness to commit to civic responsibility
should be commended and returning members.
Dowling and Holman. I thank you as well.
And finally, thank you to all my friends who came today
to support me in this appointment.
I appreciate you. I have thought a lot about all
that has happened since I attended school.
The last week of my eighth grade year in Old Orchard Beach.
Three boys very clearly in pain, burned our school
to the ground, poured a can of gasoline down the hallway,
dropped a match and ran the old federal school.
I remember it like it was yesterday.
I was with my best friend Kathy, and we stood in disbelief.
We were 12. There were no cell phones, no advance warning.
We arrived to a burning building and fire trucks.
It is a vivid image.
Since then, I've thought about those boys
and wondered about their lives and what went wrong.
They were not traditional students,
but they were clever with their hands, able
to fix things and build things.
But schools didn't consider that valuable.
Didn't consider them valuable.
They were ridiculed and teased and no one listened to them.
Today we have a variety of teaching methods
to meet the needs of all students, social workers
and guidance counselors who listen
and staff who understand
that there are many different kinds of learners.
Thankfully, some things have changed.
I listened to my friends today giving their message in many
languages and I thought about how life is different
for them, how it has changed,
how there are things they miss, things they left behind,
and the importance of their message.
Most left family familiar surroundings, language
that's easy to use so much, mostly
because of persecution, war,
unfair imprisonment, genocide.
Not wanting to leave,
but having to leave to survive, to live.
I'm reminded of my privilege.
About two years ago I posted online
that I wondered if there was anyone out there
who I could hire to finish the edges of some granite.
I had a reply came through. I can do it. Do you remember me?
It was Russell Leo.
I had him in school when he was seven years old.
He now lived around the corner, had kids
of his own, was all grown up.
It was a delight to reconnect.
Rick Rodriguez answered a post that I had trying
to sell some horseshoe rings.
Don't ask. He looked the same as I had remembered him at 10.
But now he had his own son who was six. How did that happen?
And then I received a message from Deirdre Darcy,
a young woman I had at SMCC.
And it read and I quote, I'm in training
to be a special education ed tech.
And we were told to contact someone who impacted our life.
I thought of you. You changed my way of thinking.
I don't take things so personally anymore,
and I'm more confident in my own self.
Some things change whether we're ready or not.
People grow up, we age and the world changes.
A few years ago, I was helping a young man from Rwanda at a
food pantry in Portland, standing on the steps
of the Woodford's Congregational Church.
I heard a voice say Miss DI know it's you.
Do you remember me? I knew the voice.
It took me back in time. More than 40 years.
I looked up and yes, it was Louise Moore.
She was my student at Sawyer School in 1978.
She had come to my home in Saco.
I took her to the beach, had a barbecue with friends.
She remembered all of it.
It had made a difference in her life.
And here she was making a difference in
mine, remembering me.
Some things never change.
I remember the first time I,
The first time I buried a student,
I was teaching at South Portland High School.
Sherry had just graduated a car accident. Tragic.
We stood at the cemetery with about 20 students
who didn't know what to do,
but they weren't ready to go home to leave her there alone.
So we stood for a long time telling our
favorite stories about her.
Things we would never forget. Ways we would remember her.
We shared until we were outta breath.
I have buried more students since then.
Too many drug overdoses, mental health.
Too much to say. Some things must change.
All of us are running around with a sign around our neck
that asks, am I needed?
And the answer is yes, we're all needed.
And finding out how to make a difference is as simple
as looking up saying yes.
When I was teaching at SMCC,
I had a young man from Afghanistan, rasa.
He told me he graduated from Ola Beach High School.
I graduated from there.
I told him, he then proceeded to tell me
that his senior year, his parents got an
apartment in South Portland.
But he didn't want to leave.
He wanted to graduate with his friends.
A place he knew after already having lost so much.
Ms. Sandy was the school secretary.
He said she and her husband,
Mr. George, let me live with them.
My last year. He told me funny stories about his first time
living with a dog and about how she cooked the meat.
So rare he couldn't eat it.
You need to invite her
to hear your sacred story at City Hall.
I said, and he did. And she came and I met her.
But it was not the first time. It was Sandy McSweeney.
We had grown up in the same town,
graduated high school together.
Imagine our lives interconnected.
Some things should not change.
In 2014, I was on an agricultural trip
and we were in Warren in Maine.
There was a man giving us a tour of his farm about my age.
And suddenly I looked up to see a sign that read Spear Farm.
Was your mother's name Edna by any chance?
I asked him when the crowd broke up. Yes it was.
He answered. How did you know? I was stunned.
I couldn't believe what I was about to say
because I said my dad answered an ad in the Boston Globe
in 1940.
He was 16 years old and he came here
and worked as a farm hand for your mom and dad.
It's because of that experience
that he moved his family from Boston to Maine
after the war in 1951,
they came back to this farm for their honeymoon.
I have pictures of it. My mother didn't know what hit her.
She made us laugh when she would say she was
constipated for two weeks.
She'd never seen an outhouse in her life.
I told him the two of us laughed.
The world is small
and if you just take a minute to talk
to someone you don't know, reach out and offer to help.
You'll see how small it really is. Loss is hard.
Starting over is hard. Change is hard.
Just recently I met Father Leopold from Burundi at a
wedding I officiated.
He is a Catholic priest
who started an orphanage in his country.
We met, we talked,
I consider myself a Catholic in recovery.
But my concerns with the Catholic church do not take
precedent over hungry children.
Children who've lost their parents to HIV
or other tragedies.
It does not dominate over the needs of these kids.
So I found a suitcase in my attic, filled it
with children's books, holiday decorations, and a donation.
And again, I was conscious of my privilege.
Rebecca Oliver was my student more than 10 years ago
at the community college.
She just texted me on Friday night to say,
and I quote, you were the jumpstart
to realizing I was worthwhile and I could fight back
and demand I was equal.
I cried. Education is not just about reading, writing
and arithmetic.
It's much more. There are people in our community
who are hungry, alone, lost,
unhoused, confused.
There are people new to our city.
Not sure where to turn, who to trust, how the system works.
Suffering in many ways, much of the time.
Many of my friends like those here tonight.
We must remember there is a power inequity.
And we need to ask, is this the change we want?
I'm a cat lover
and I was reading about room eight, the name of the cat
who lived in a schoolhouse for more than 16 years.
In the writeup it said, and I quote, schools
or communities built on routine, kindness and belonging.
Because every day, hundreds of people show up
to the same place, see the same faces
and following the same rhythms.
Room eight wanted that he wanted to belong somewhere.
So he chose a school and the school chose him back.
He taught routine, showing up every day matters.
He taught responsibility. Someone had to feed him.
Notice when he was hurt, make sure he got home safely.
He taught acceptance.
He had no invitation, no official role,
no purpose except to be himself.
And the door stayed open.
And most of all, he taught that belonging isn't given.
It's created by returning, by trusting,
by being welcomed, by showing up day after day, year
after year, until you become part of the story, end
of the quote from that story.
And 70 years later, people still remember,
roommate, look up.
Our neighbors need us. The stranger on the bus needs us.
Our school youth need us.
My friends who spoke to you tonight, they need us.
They need us to remember their faces, hear their voices,
and listen to their words.
Because it matters. They matter.
And we need them.
We need them to teach us about the needs of all children,
about kindness, openness,
and welcoming others about differences, about how
to live in a community with an open mind
and about how to change this world.
This is education too.
I can tell you that the Somalis make the best Samsa,
the Iraqis, the best doma, the randee, the best.
Sobe, the Cambodians, the best noodles, the angolans,
the best tilapia and the Iranians, the best rice.
I have tried it all,
but my friends have given me more than that.
I have learned about true loss
and suffering, about forgiveness,
about equity, about change.
And it has opened my eyes.
Please remember that even in small ways,
we all have a chance to make a difference, to educate
and be educated.
We can all change. We need to create good change.
The right change. Charan,
Aun,
obrigado, Tasha.
K. Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much for coming tonight and for staying
and for listening, um, and for being attentive
and responsive.
Um, I appreciate everyone being here
and I look forward to the next year.
Um, I look forward to looking out at this audience
and not seeing empty chairs, um,
but seeing the look of difference
and the look of acceptance.
Um, and so I thank you
and I will accept a motion to adjourn.
Oh, somebody, uh,
actually you need to say something, Daniel.
I thought I was seconding. No.
Um, I moved for the inaugural address
to be, uh, spread on the record. Seconded.
Okay. And all those in favor? Okay. And that's unanimous.
And now a motion to adjourn. Move to adjourn.
Move to adjourn by, uh, member Dowling.
And seconded by member Feller.
All those in favor of adjournment
and we are hereby adjourn.
Thank you very much.
I think we have to give it. Likewise. Congratulations.